---
  layout: post
  title: 4.9-python-string-methods-labs
  language: python
---

##  String Methods Interactive Practice
###  What will each of the following lines of code return?

???

#  String Practice

?: print "i am super excited about coding!".upper()

[ ] "I Am Super Excited About Coding!"
[X] "I AM SUPER EXCITED ABOUT CODING!"
[ ] "I aM sUPER eXCITED aBOUT cODING!"


?: print "Hi! My name is Joe".swapcase()

[X] "hI! mY NAME IS jOE"
[ ] "HI! MY NAME IS JOE"
[ ] "hi! my name is joe"


?: print len("short string")

[X] 12
[ ] 11
[ ] 2

?: print "taylor swift".capitalize()
[ ] TAYLOR swift
[X] Taylor swift
[ ] Taylor Swift

???

???

#  Now it's your turn to use string methods.

?: Get enthusiastic about Python! How do I print out "I love Python" in all caps?

[ ] "I love Python".swapcase()
[X] "I love Python".upper()
[ ] "I love Python".uppercase()

?: Use a method to print out how long this sentence is: "This is a pretty long string. I wonder how long it is?"

[X] len("This is a pretty long string. I wonder how long it is?")
[ ] "This is a pretty long string. I wonder how long it is?".swapcase()
[ ] printlength("This is a pretty long string. I wonder how long it is?")

?: Wouldn't it be great if there was a string method that always capitalized the first letter of a string? There is! "make it capitalize the first letter in this string!"

[ ] "make it capitalize the first letter in this string!".upper()
[ ] "make it capitalize the first letter in this string!".swapcase()
[X] "make it capitalize the first letter in this string!".capitalize()

???
