---
  layout: post
  title: 8.2-appengine-datastore-intro
  language: 
---


#  App Engine Datastore Intro

##  Objectives

+ Understand what Datastore does and why it is useful
+ Store, query, and delete data in Datastore from an AppEngine app
+ Use the Datastore viewer to see the contents of your Datastore
+ Create new data models to solve a problem

##  Motivation / Why Should You Care?

The apps we've created so far have been kind of dumb. They can't remember anything between one request and a second request, unless we keep track with a query string or in the post request directly before. A *database* solves that problem by giving you a way to save information for later retrieval.

*Datastore* is a database provided as part of App Engine. We can use it in our App Engine apps to store data in one request and then retrieve it in another request.

##  Lesson Plan

###  Importing App Engine database

We’ll interact with App Engine using the ndb module (stands for new database). First, import the module.

```python
from google.appengine.ext import ndb
```

###  Creating a Model

Before we actually store data, we need to figure out how to structure it. The structure of our data is called a model. This is like a giant spreadsheet. Each column of the spreadsheet is a property and each row in a new entity.

Now, let’s create a Student model together. A student will have a name, a university, and a birthday. Students don’t have to provide their birthday though. These parts of a student (name, university, birthday) are called properties. Notice that properties have a type. In this case, we are using strings (for name and university) and an integer (for the age). Properties can also be required or optional.

```python
class Student(ndb.Model):
  name = ndb.StringProperty(required=True)
  university = ndb.StringProperty(required=True)
  age = ndb.IntegerProperty(required=False)
```

###  Creating an *Entity* from the model

```python
student = Student(name="Adina Wallis", university="U. Mich.")
student.put()
```

We create the Student *entity* on the first line and then we store it in the database with the method call to `put()`.

###  Running the code with App Engine

```
dev_appserver.py --datastore_consistency_policy=consistent students
```

###  Datastore viewer

App Engine conveniently provides a way to look at the actual data in the datastore.  This is like looking at the entire 'spreadsheet' of the database. All you need to do is navigate to `http://localhost:8000` in your browser.

###  Datastore Keys

When we store something in the datastore using the `put()` method it returns a *key* which allows us to retrieve the stored entity later.

```python
key = student.put()
```

###  Getting an entity with a key

To retrieve an entity with a key we use the `get()` method. (put...get... get it!)

```python
self.response.write(key.get().name)
```

###  Using the key

You can build a key from a type and id using the Key object constructor:

```python
key = ndb.Key('Student', id)
```

Now we can get that student from the database.

You can also get the id of a key and get an entity from the id using the methods `id()` and `get_by_id(ID)` like so:

```python
id = key.id()
student = Student.get_by_id(id)
```

We can also use a key in a url using the urlsafe() function:

```python
#  Get id and navigate to that url
self.redirect('/view_student?key=%s' % key.urlsafe())

#  Get an entity from an ID
key = ndb.Key(urlsafe=self.request.get("key"))
student = key.get()
```

###  Querying from the Datastore

To access all of the students that we may have stored we would make a `query()` on the `Student` model, and then fetch it. Like so:

```python
student_query = Student.query()
student_data = student_query.fetch()
```

This is like forming the question "Do you have any Students?" with `.query()` and then asking the question and getting a response with `fetch()`

####  `get()` vs `fetch()`

There is another method similiar to `fetch()` that also retrieves data from the datastore which is `get()`.  The difference being `fetch()` can get multiple records while `get()` retrieves a single one.

###  Deleting a record

Once you have an object (in this case `student`) you can use the key to delete it from the database:

```python
student.key.delete()
```

##  Conclusion / So What?

Databases allow developers to store information in between user sessions. This opens up a world of possibility and allows for amazing and complex interactions with software. Websites and Apps can now remember things about their users.

##  Hints and Hurdles

+ Make sure you call `put()` when writing to the database or your *entity* won't get saved.
