---
  layout: post
  title: 2.1-intro-to-javascript-and-the-developer-console
  language: javascript
---

# Intro to Javascript and the Developer Console
After the lesson, you'll be able to:
+ Understand and define key programming concepts
+ Use the JS console
+ Understand the console is for testing, does not permanently store code
+ Use Arithmetic Operators in console
+ Use and concatenate strings in console

## Why JavaScript?
JavaScript is what gives the web its "magic".  The most useful and interesting applications on the internet today are mostly all powered by JavaScript.


## Using the Console

We can play-around with Javascript in the Javascript Console. This is like a playground to experiment with Javascript.

To get to the console, open chrome, and navigate to any webpage.  Press <kbd>command</kbd> + <kbd>option</kbd> + <kbd>J</kbd>

This gives you an area down at the bottom of the screen, called the console. The ">" symbol is called the prompt, where you can type js code.


## Simple interpretation
Try typing these lines, pressing enter after each one:
```
>4
>2+3
>2*3
```
Note that your friend the interpreter mostly just repeats what you say, but evaluates mathematical expressions. JavaScript performs basic math as you would expect, with the operators +, -, /, *.  A less familiar operator is %, or modulo. See if you figure out what modulo does.

```
> 10 % 5
```
```
> 11 % 5
```
```
> 13 % 5
```
```
> 16 % 5
```

```
> 23 % 16
```

Here are some other mathematical operators:

| operator 	| name      	| description    	| usage         	|
|----------	|-----------	|----------------	|---------------	|
| -        	| negation  	| subtracts      	| 3 - 2 = 1     	|
| +        	| plus      	| adds           	| 3 + 2 = 5     	|
| *        	| multiply  	| multiplies     	| 3 * 2 = 6     	|
| /        	| divide    	| divides        	| 12 / 3 = 4    	|
| %        	| modulus   	| remainder      	| 12 % 5 = 2    	|
| ++       	| increment 	| increases by 1 	| x=1; x++; x=2 	|
| --       	| decrement 	| decreases by 1 	| x=1; x--; x=0   |


## Strings
So now  we know we can do math in the js console. The interpreter will do things to pieces of text, too. In programming we call bits of text "strings".  

```
>"my string"
```
Note that you have to put text inside quotes before the interpreter can understand them. Anything between quotes is called a string.

Now try adding two strings together:
```
>"first name" + " last name"
```

Combining strings with the + operator is called concatenation.

JavaScript uses + symbol for math when it is operating on numbers, but when it sees strings, it will concatenate (link together) the text.

Let’s test this. Try entering these three different expressions:
```
>1 + 1
>”1” + “1”
>”1” + 1
```


1 + 1 is a mathematical expression adding two numbers, while “1” + “1” is an expression concatenating two strings of the character 1. If you try to add a string and a number, both pieces are treated as strings and concatenated into a bigger string.

Our code and the results as we use the JS Console are only there until we hit refresh. Think of the console as a place to test ideas quickly, not a place to build something that will endure for the ages. 
