---
  layout: post
  title: Intro to the Command Line
  language: command-line
---

# Prior Knowledge:
+ Intro to the web
+ Github account setup
+ Learn.co walkthrough
+ Intro to HTML
+ Intro to CSS

# Student Objectives:
Students will be able to navigate their system’s file structure using the CLI (command line interface) in terminal.
Understand and explain what a terminal is and why we use it
Navigate and manipulate directories

# Motivation?
Back in the day (the 1980s!), computers only had a terminal to control them. Later on, Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs) were created to make computers more accessible and intuitive for those who weren't as computer savvy. Developers continue to use the terminal instead of the GUI because it speeds up development and allows for more fine-grained control.

# Command Line
+ Open Terminal
+ ` ~`: the tilde means you’re in your user's home directory.
+ `pwd`: print working directory - it tells us where we are.
+ `ls`: check what directories are within the directory where you are standing by using
+ `cd <directory-name>`: change directory
+ `mkdir <directory-name>`: make a new directory.
+ `touch <file-name.extention>`: create a file
+ `rm <file-name>`: remove a file
+ `mv <file to move> <final destination>`: move a file to a new destination. You have to be in the same directory as the file you are moving. Also you have to list the path of directories in order to move the file to the final destination
+ `cd ..` to move up one directory.
+ `cd ../..` will bring you up two parent directories

#  Student Challenge:
1. Create a directory called "Egypt" in the "around-the-world" directory
1. Create a directory called "Cairo" inside the "Egypt" directory
1. Create a file called "pyramids.txt"
1. Move "pyramids.txt" into the "Cairo" directory. Hint: List the path from around-the-world to Cairo
1. **Stretch:** Create a new country, city, and landmark file in the "around-the-world" directory


# Tips and tricks:
 If you start typing a directory name or file name you can click `Tab` and the command line will automatically fill in the rest of the directory/file name. If you click `Tab` twice it will show you all of the directories/files inside your current directory.
 Navigating your computer from the command line is a lot about muscle memory. The more practice you have the faster you will get!

# Conclusion
As we learn to build complicated applications, being able to swiftly navigate your computer using the command line will make your life much easier. The command line will be important not just for navigation, but you'll also use it to do things like boot the local server for your web apps, write scripts to automate tasks, and execute other important functions on your computer.
